# Œdipa’s Rocks

<small><a href="http://moacir.com">Moacir P. de Sá Pereira</a> / <a href="http://twitter.com/muziejus">@muziejus</a><br />
Asst. Prof. / Faculty Fellow, <a href="http://english.fas.nyu.edu/page/home">Department of English</a>, New York University<br />
Albany, NY, 23 March 2018</small>

Note: Thanks.

---

![Königsberg in 1613](https://i.imgur.com/RisugVN.jpg)

<div class="credit">“[Gedenkblatt zur sechshundertjährigen Jubelfeier der
Königlichen Haupt und Residenz-Stadt Königsberg in Preußen um 1813. Nach einem
Stich von Joachim Bering von
1613](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Koenigsberg,_Map_by_Bering_1613.jpg).”</div>

Note: I want to start this talk with a story that may be familiar to you all.
Hopefully, it isn’t, but we’ll see. Here we have a map of Königsberg from,
according to Wikipedia, 1613. This city is now known as KalininGRAT, and it’s
part of Russia. I want to turn the clock forward one hundred years, though,

---

![Königsberg in 1613](https://i.imgur.com/SLonpwr.jpg)

<div class="credit">“[Gedenkblatt zur sechshundertjährigen Jubelfeier der
Königlichen Haupt und Residenz-Stadt Königsberg in Preußen um 1813. Nach einem
Stich von Joachim Bering von
1613](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Koenigsberg,_Map_by_Bering_1613.jpg).”</div>

Note: And ask you to imagine yourself here on the Kneiphof, the central
island, studying at the university. You’re about a generation older than
Immanuel Kant. Let’s say it’s one in the morning, and you’ve been drinking
with your classmates. Invariably, so the story goes, the challenge will arise:
can you cross all seven bridges across the Pregel River, and I’ve colored it
in here to make the bridges more visible, can you cross all seven bridges once
and only once? Maybe you make a wager with your classmates and stumble out
into the bracing Baltic wind, but you’re convinced that, this time, it’s
surely possible.

Spoiler: It’s not actually possible.

---

![Euler’s map of Königsberg](https://i.imgur.com/HTezdGR.png)

<div class="credit">Euler, “[Solutio Problematis Ad Geometriam Situs
Pertinentis](http://eulerarchive.maa.org/docs/originals/E053.pdf).”</div>

Note: In 1735, Leonhard Euler presents a paper before the St. Petersburg
Academy of Sciences. When published, the article includes an abstracted map of
Königsberg, a step removed from any sort of map one would use to move around
in the city, which I’ve adapted here. Kneiphof becomes just “A,” and each bridge is a lowercase letter.

---

> Si fuerint plures duabus regiones, ad quas ducentium pontium numerus est
impar, tum certo affirmari potest, talem transitum non dari.

> If there are more than two areas to which an odd number of bridges lead,
then such a journey is impossible.

<div class="credit">Euler,
“[Solutio…](http://eulerarchive.maa.org/docs/originals/E053.pdf)” and “[The
Solution of a Problem Relating to the Geometry of
Position](https://books.google.com/books?id=XqYTk0sXmpoC&lpg=PA2&pg=PA8#v=onepage&q&f=false)”
in Biggs, Lloyd, Wilson, _Graph Theory 1736–1936_.</div>

Note: Even for someone not particularly mathematically inclined like me,
Euler’s proof is exceptionally readable, and it leads to the conclusion I’ve
excerpted here. Nevertheless, what I want to underscore is the way the
story moves from our imagined fiction of drunk students stumbling around the
city to Euler’s sterilizing reframing of the question. People are removed from
the question, and places become mere letters.

---

![Königsberg as graph](/images/euler-graph.png)

Note: Current accounts of the problem abstract it even further. At least Euler
still speaks of “regiones” and “pontes,” regions and bridges. Here, the
bridges are now “edges” and the shores of the Pregel bound “nodes.” What began
this talk as a map of Königsberg, already abstracted in its own way, is now,
simply, a graph, the locus of interest for the branch of mathematics, graph
theory, that emerged out of Euler’s paper. Again, the people, the buildings…
none of that matters anymore

It’s tempting to read this as a progression from the particular to the
universal, as surely that was Euler’s goal.

---

### Third slide

---

## Thanks!
#### [http://moacir.com/talks/simple-js-maps/](http://moacir.com/talks/simple-js-maps/)
